#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Standard deviation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Having obtained a set of measurements and determined the mean value, it
 is helpful to report how widely the individual measurements are scattered
 from the mean.
 A quantitative description of this scatter of measurement will give an
 idea of the precision of the experiment.
 Statistical theory states that the precision of the measurement can be
 determined by calculating a quantity called the standard deviation from
 the mean of the measurements.
 The standard deviation from the mean, which has a symbol of 
\begin_inset Formula $\sigma$
\end_inset

, is defined as
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{equation}
\sigma=\sqrt{\frac{1}{N-1}\sum_{i=1}^{N}\left(x_{i}-\bar{x}\right)^{2}}
\end{equation}

\end_inset

The standard deviation answers the question “If, after having made a series
 of measurement and averaging the results, I now make one more measurement,
 how close is the new measurement likely to come to the previous mean?”
 The quantity 
\begin_inset Formula $\sigma$
\end_inset

 gives the probability that the measurements fall within a certain range
 of the measured mean.
 Probability theory states that approximately 68.3% of all repeated measurements
 should fall within a range of plus or minus 
\begin_inset Formula $\sigma$
\end_inset

 from the mean.
 Furthermore, 95.5% of all repeated measurements should fall within a range
 of 2
\begin_inset Formula $\sigma$
\end_inset

 from the mean.
 As a final note, 99.73% of all measurements should fall within 3
\begin_inset Formula $\sigma$
\end_inset

 of the mean.
 This implies that if one of the measurements is 3
\begin_inset Formula $\sigma$
\end_inset

 or farther from the mean, it is very unlikely that it is a random uncertainty.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection
Standard Error
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To get a good estimate of some quantity, several repeated measurements have
 to be taken.
 Another issue that can be addressed by these repeated measurements is the
 precision of the mean.
 After all, this is what is really of concern, because the mean is the best
 estimate of the true value.
 The precision of the mean is indicated by a quantity called the standard
 error.
 Other common name is standard deviation of the mean.
 Once the standard deviation has been calculated for N measurements, it
 is very easy to calculate standard error (which has a symbol of 
\begin_inset Formula $\alpha$
\end_inset

) using the equation
\begin_inset Formula 
\begin{equation}
\alpha=\frac{\sigma}{\sqrt{N}}
\end{equation}

\end_inset

It is this quantity that answers the question, “If I repeat the entire series
 of N measurements and get a second mean, how close can I expect this second
 mean to come to the first one?” One needs not repeat the entire experiment
 multiple times to get the standard error.
 If the variation in data seem to be caused by a series of small random
 events, then the above equation can be used to find the standard error.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An important feature of the standard error is the factor N in the denominator.
 The standard deviation 
\begin_inset Formula $\sigma$
\end_inset

 represents the average uncertainty in the individual measurements.
 Thus, if we were to make some more measurements (using the same technique),
 the standard deviation would not change appreciably.
 However, the standard error would slowly decrease as expected.
 If we make more measurements before computing the mean, we would naturally
 expect the final result to be more reliable.
 This is one of the obvious ways to improve the precision of our measurements.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
